Add instructions to RTL (#1213)
vaadin/flow-and-components-documentation: documentation/advanced/tutorial-i18n-localization.asciidoc

}
----

=== Using Localization in the Application

> Using the internationalization in the application is a combination of using the

Reviewer: A bit of a mismatch here with “using localization” in the heading and then “using the internationalization” in the text. Minor detail, just wondering if anyone knows how to properly use these terms (I don’t)? 😅

Author: Me neither 🤷

    }
}
----

> === Supporting Right-to-Left mode in the application

Reviewer: Why a third level heading? To me it seems a second level heading would work fine.

The writing style for our docs uses Title Case. Should fix the one heading above to follow that as well.

```suggestion
== Supporting Right-to-Left Mode
```

Author: I guess I should fix all the titles on this page to follow this style, then.

Author: Changed titles.

> Vaadin components have now support for RTL languages, so to make your

Reviewer 2: Would leave out the "now", as it implies this is a new feature, which will not be the case in 1 year

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vaadin components have support for RTL languages. To make your
```
Vaadin components supporting RTL does not imply that you have to make changes to your application. It’s good to note that they do work out-of-the-box, but it’s a separate task to make your custom application code also support RTL.

Author: Changed the text a bit. WDYT?

translation, providing the sample for the Arabic translation>>, at your main
layout you can add a code like such:

[source,java]
----
public class MainLayout extends VerticalLayout {

    public MainLayout() {
        // ...
        final UI ui = UI.getCurrent();
        if (ui.getLocale().getLanguage() == "ar") {
            ui.setDirection(Direction.RIGHT_TO_LEFT);
        }
    }
}
----

This will work if changing of locale is only based on the `Accept-Language`
coming from the client, but if user can define their language, for instance,
on your application's setting page, then you can make your main layout implement
the `LocaleChangeObserver` interface, so it will receive the changes of locale
and then you can set the direction based on the locale set:

[source,java]
----
public class MainLayout extends VerticalLayout implements LocaleChangeObserver {

    @Override
    public void localeChange(LocaleChangeEvent event) {
        if (event.getLocale().getLanguage() == "ar") {
            event.getUI().setDirection(Direction.RIGHT_TO_LEFT);
        } else {
            event.getUI().setDirection(Direction.LEFT_TO_RIGHT);
        }
    }
}
----

> ==== Frontend projects

Reviewer: Would again use a second level heading.
```suggestion
== Frontend Projects
```

Author: Done.

For frontend applications only, to set the RTL mode you can call `document.dir = 'rtl'`.

> ==== Adding RTL support to your custom elements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Adding RTL Support to Your Custom Elements
```

Author: Done.

If you have your own custom elements, there are a few steps needed in order to
add RTL support to them:

. If your element extends Vaadin's `ElementMixin`, make sure that it depends on
the version starting from `2.3.0`. If not, you can make the element extends it
or `DirMixin` only (`DirMixin` is part of the `@vaadin/vaadin-element-mixin`
package).

+
[source,javascript]
----
import { PolymerElement } from '@polymer/polymer/polymer-element.js';
import { DirMixin } from '@vaadin/vaadin-element-mixin/vaadin-dir-mixin.js';

class MyElement extends DirMixin(PolymerElement) {}
----

+
The `DirMixin` registers the element to changes on the `dir` attribute at the
document level and keeps it in sync with the element's `dir` attribute. That's
helpful to easily check the RTL status in both CSS and JS code.

> . Make sure your styles are adjusted properly for the RTL mode.

Reviewer: I think we should mention logical properties (e.g. `margin-inline-start`), but add a disclaimer that those can only be used if you don’t have to support older browsers.

Author: Added more info about CSS Logical Properties with link.

+
For example, if you define values for the padding on the `:host`, like:

+
[source,css]
----
:host {
    padding-right: 1em;
    padding-left: 2em;
}
----
+
You may want to define the proper style for the RTL, like:
+
[source,css]
----
:host([dir="rtl"]) {
    padding-right: 2em;
    padding-left: 1em;
}
----
+
You may want to pay attention to declarations such as `padding`, `margin`,
`text-align`, `float` and `transform` on your styles. Flex containers usually
are handled well by the browser and don't require extra work. More details can

> https://rtlstyling.com/posts/rtl-styling/[be found here].

Reviewer: Generally, avoid “click here” type of link text. Would be better to provide a descriptive title of the page that it links to.

Author: Done.

    }
}
----

== Supporting Right-to-Left Mode

Vaadin components have support for RTL languages. The components will work
out-of-the-box on this mode, but to make your application handle this mode, a
few changes are needed.

On top of the last examples, let's say that your application is now also
translated into a RTL Language, such as Arabic. Besides <<Provider sample for
translation, providing the sample for the Arabic translation>>, at your main
layout you can add a code like such:

[source,java]
----
public class MainLayout extends VerticalLayout {

    public MainLayout() {
        // ...
        final UI ui = UI.getCurrent();
        if (ui.getLocale().getLanguage() == "ar") {
            ui.setDirection(Direction.RIGHT_TO_LEFT);
        }
    }

> }

Reviewer: As a protip, you can use the following to include the source code in the text, instead of copy-pasting it.

```asciidoc
[source, java]
----
include::../src/main/java/com/vaadin/flow/tutorial/advanced/RTLSources.java[tags=*, indent=0]
----
```

You should add a “tag” around the code block (using specially formatted comments) that you want to show, unless you want all of the code in the file to be shown. For example:

```java
@CodeFor("advanced/tutorial-i18n-localization.asciidoc")
 public class RTLSources {
// tag::rtl-app[]
     public class MainLayout extends VerticalLayout {

         public MainLayout() {
             // ...
             final UI ui = UI.getCurrent();
             if (ui.getLocale().getLanguage() == "ar") {
                 ui.setDirection(Direction.RIGHT_TO_LEFT);
             }
         }
     }
// end::rtl-app[]
 } 
```

[That’s a built-in AsciiDoc feature](https://asciidoctor.org/docs/user-manual/#include-partial), which I’m recommending all teams start using eventually, so that code is more easily verified to actually work and kept up-to-date in the written documentation.

Author: Well, that's nice to know. I haven't used AsciiDoc for a long time and, back then, nothing complex.

}
----

== Supporting Right-to-Left Mode

Vaadin components have support for RTL languages. The components will work

> out-of-the-box on this mode, but to make your application handle this mode, a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
out-of-the-box in RTL mode, but to make your application switch to RTL, a
```

Reviewer: I’d go with “make your application support both LTR and RTL modes”. Rolf’s suggestion sounds to me like it’s either or, you can’t support both with the same codebase.

Author: That's a valid point. It didn't sound like that to me, but I changed as suggested to make it more clear.

}
----

== Frontend Projects

For frontend applications only, to set the RTL mode you can call `document.dir = 'rtl'`.

== Adding RTL Support to Your Custom Elements

> If you have your own custom elements, there are a few steps needed in order to

Reviewer 3: Should this be rewritten a bit to indicate that not only may custom web components need tweaks, but any custom UI feature (e.g. css) as well?

Author: Something like this?

```suggestion
If you have your own custom elements or your application has custom styles,
there are a few steps needed in order to add RTL support to them:
```

And also changing the title to **Adding RTL Support to Your Custom Elements or Application**

Reviewer 3: maybe "or your application has custom styles or **layouts**"?
of course layouts would be css-based too, so not sure how meaningful it is to make that distinction...

Author: I would say that "custom styles" covers _layouts_, in this case.
